---
title: "The Learning Management Platform: Canvas’ Rise to Power"
created: 2025-12-15
---
> Samuel Eaton
> University of California Berkeley
> Political Economy 159: Digital Technology, Political Economy, and Justice
> Khalid Kadir

In 2011, Instructure launched its learning management system (LMS) Canvas with the explicit goal of displacing BlackBoard, the incumbent LMS provider (Locke, 2015). Founded in 2008, Instructure was started by two BYU graduate students who hoped to address all the ways in which the predominant LMS systems lacked. What they came up with, Canvas, differentiated itself by adopting a new kind of business model that was gaining traction: Software-as-a-service (Tate, 2018). This meant that Canvas was built on the cloud, so instead of managing hosting and versioning yourself or paying someone to do it (like Blackboard), you paid Instructure to use their Canvas cloud instance and took updates as they came. In 2013, when edutechnica began tracking LMS market share (Data-Driven Campus LMS Strategy, 2013), Blackboard sat at around 40% with its biggest competitor being Moodle, an open-source alternative to Blackboard's commercial LMS. Fast forward to 2025, Blackboard’s parent company has declared bankruptcy and Canvas now holds a dominant 45% and growing market share (LMS Data - Spring 2025 Updates, 2025). 

For how huge of a business they have become, the learning management system is a relatively new invention. Early LMS systems were introduced in the 1990s, and although referred to by different names, they were all intended to overcome the time and place barriers that had always existed in course delivery (Sulun, 2018, p. 90-91); they functioned to manage, monitor, aggregate, and report on learning activities through centrally controlled, scalable web systems. Up to the inception of Canvas, the LMS product category steadily homogenized, but now warrants a rebrand for the ways in which Canvas resembles a platform technology. Instructure’s massive growth unfortunately cannot be attributed to significant pedagogical improvements, but instead to their cloud-based SaaS business model which makes them an intermediary—expanding rentiership and enabling student datafication, with important implications for pedagogy and safety. Enter, the learning management platform.

# Business Reasons

## What It Is and What It Isn’t

To start with the basics, a LMS is not a pedagogical approach, it is a product category—an incredibly homogeneous one at that. One learning technology director even went so far as to state that “Any elearning tool, no matter how openly designed, will eventually become indistinguishable from a Learning Management System once a threshold of supported use-cases has been reached” (Norman, 2013). He speaks to the fact that at their core, LMSs are content aggregators. They bring many activities and use-cases under one hood. The result is an ever-expanding menu of links which places learning content several clicks deep and separates it out from learning tools like quizzes and discussions (Kroner, 2016). Unsurprisingly, if you dig up a screenshot of Canvas’ original UI from over a decade ago, it looks almost identical to now except for stylistic updates to make it look more modern. LMSs are the way they are despite the cry that online learning should feel like a journey, not a directory (Mintz, 2020). They are this way despite many trying to reimagine or forgo it altogether. They are this way because the LMS offers a convenient, consumerized, compliant way to integrate all of an educational institutions' information systems (Kroner, 2017). After all, the LMS is a learning management system, more of a bureaucratic tool that standardizes and applies methodologies than one that improves teaching (Marachi & Quill, 2020, p. 430).

## Learning Management as a Service

Although Canvas’ product had similar functionality to other competitors in the market, it was very different in the way it did business. This spirit is embodied in their ad Change is Good (2011), a parody of Apple’s famous 1984 Macintosh ad. Canvas was an early adopter of a new business model known as software-as-a-service (SaaS), part of a trend that Sadowski argues are “creating rentier relations by another name” (2020, p. 567). This is a departure from the way institutions had previously deployed their LMS—either by hosting it themself, or by paying a third party to manage hosting for them. This was the case for both commercially licensed LMSs (like Blackboard) or ones with an open source license (like Moodle). Although the distinction between managed hosting and the cloud is much blurrier than self hosting and the other two, there are some differences. The most important one is that it’s more centrally controlled, you take updates as they come instead of choosing when they happen. It is also dependent on having a cloud provider instead of using homegrown or rented (but not cloud-scale) servers. In this arrangement, everyone using Canvas is beholden to Instructure's Canvas, the way they want it. 

“Ultimately, the rentier model hinges on the platform becoming a (necessary) intermediary in the production, circulation, or consumption process” (p. 568); therefore, I propose these three options exist on a spectrum. One the left hand is the self-managed LMS, where an institution retains the most control over the product they choose—on their own servers and chosen version. Next is managed hosting, where servers (part of the consumption process) are transformed into a rentable service. On the right is SaaS, a final expansion of control over the specific configuration of the LMS you use and your server traffic. This expansion of ownership and control is exactly the goal of platforms, to digitally enclose activities in order to extract rent and data (p. 572-574). It is worth noting that Blackboard also moved down this spectrum, launching their own SaaS offering in 2014 and vigorously encouraging its customers to migrate to it. Unfortunately, spread out among the different hosting options and versions they supported, movement was slow, and by the time Blackboard got over half its users on their SaaS platform Canvas had well surpassed them (Feldstein, 2018).

# Features of the LMP

In Platform Capitalism, Srnicek identifies that platforms are “characterized by providing the infrastructure to intermediate between different user groups, by displaying monopoly tendencies driven by network effects, employing cross-subsidization to draw in different user groups, and by having a designed core architecture that governs the interaction possibilities" (2019, p. 48). The goal of all this is to seize a valuable resource: data. As digital environments provide an easy way to do so, the platform business model has emerged as the best way to profit off and take advantage of this new resource (p. 88). As we will investigate, Canvas fulfills a majority of these criteria. 

At its most basic, Canvas provides the infrastructure to intermediate interaction between students, teachers, and elearning tools (plugins or proprietary). Since it is premised on the cloud, all of these interactions funnel through Instructure’s servers and are made available to them as data. As for monopolization, Canvas’ astronomical success and market capture since its inception certainly shows it moving in that direction, but the network effect does not seem like a sufficient explanation for its growth. Their freemium model (cross-subsidization) certainly brings in new users, the free tier of which notably does not include analytics or features that would enable serious institutional use (Canvas Free For Teacher Comparison, n.d.); they have had significant encounters with venture capital and private equity, an IPO, and an acquisition to later take them off-market, so finance is a significant factor as it often is in tech companies (Peters, 2023); it could be a certain feature called “Speed Grader” (Feldstein, 2014); it could also be their fantastic reputation (Feldstein, 2015). However, It is beyond the scope of this paper to examine the specific conditions of Instructures’ success in depth. Instead we are focusing on the end result: the empire they constructed with data and what this means for pedagogy. Before that, we’ll take a detour to examine the role of the cloud. 

## Cloud Convenience

There is one major caveat that I have been putting off discussing until now. Which is—Canvas is actually open-source. This means that if you wanted to, you could download all the code for Canvas (at [github.com/instructure/canvas-lms](http://github.com/instructure/canvas-lms)), deploy it on your own servers, and not pay Instructure a single dime. They do this by maintaining two different licenses for Canvas: a commercial license for their SaaS offering, and an open source license (specifically the GNU Affero General Public License version three) for anyone that wants to use Canvas for free. You can even contribute as long as you sign an agreement that gives Instructure joint ownership of whatever you add so they can preserve their commercial license (Contributing, 2021). Josh Coates (2020) who served as Instructure’s CEO from 2010 to 2018 and was its initial investor, says that this allows them to “make a serious commitment to openness, but at the same time have a stable and profitable business to support real change in industry.” He recons that can only happen when the business offering the SaaS solution actually owns the underlying technology, as opposed to deploying an ownerless open source software. This is Instructures’ true offering—not the actual software itself—but the infrastructure they have built on the cloud and the on-demand support staff to make sure the underlying technology is configured to your needs. It is the convenience of using Canvas on the cloud. We wouldn’t see their massive revenue growth if everyone deployed Canvas themself for free.

### A Product Platform

Out of the five different types of platforms that Srnicek (2019) outlines, Canvas most neatly fits in the category of a “product platform.” The product platform uses another type of platform (in this case a cloud platform) to turn a traditional product into a rentable service and collect subscription fees (p. 49). While he does not specifically mention SaaS, instead a more broad goods-as-a-service, for him the product platform is a way in which companies drive their marginal costs toward zero, which directly applies to SaaS where it already is close to zero. By using the cloud, Instructure outsources all their marginal costs to the most scalable and widely distributed cloud provider ever, Amazon Web Services. This is not without consequence as Ensmenger (2021) points out; the cloud exudes many of the characteristics of a traditional factory: it consumes resources, organizes labor, and pollutes, just like old industrial systems. For Couldry and Mejias (2019), the cloud functions to sustain and expand the exploitable digital space where platforms operate. It is what lets Canvas harvest data at scale.

## Student Datafication and Surveillance

Certainly, student surveillance is not new. Every party in the education process has some need for it: teachers, education institutions, and the governments that oversee them. These parties all require some way to observe student learning outcomes: teachers for their teaching, educational institutions for tracking teacher and organizational effectiveness, and governments for regulation and oversight. In this light it’s no surprise that students are extremely surveilled, both from “old-school surveillance” technologies like CCTV cameras and now “new-school surveillance” technologies that monitor activity on school-provided devices and applications (Citron, 2024). However, the extent and reach of surveillance with digital platforms is new. Students and teachers alike are tracked at a much granular level and scale on the internet. Canvas offers a large suite of analytics tools, both for administrators to view institution-wide Canvas adoption, features use, enrollment, and grade data; and for teachers to comprehensively track attendance, grades, communications, submissions, and general site activity (Canvas Analytics: A Guide to Choosing and Using the Right Tools, n.d.). They also offer an API by which you can export/download “event-level data” for your own custom use. A grand majority of what you do on Canvas is tracked, down to the specific pages that you visit, and it can all be available to teachers as well as upper management depending on access permissions. This large data collection apparatus, in absence of meaningful consent (teachers and students are often required to use Canvas by their organization) is what Sadowski would argue is a form of data “extraction” (2019, p. 7). Data, a new kind of capital rife with problematic use (p. 2-3), is an extremely valuable resource to Instructure, their third party integrations, and administrators. That it is flowing at such a massive scale and without obstruction is a major problem, as I will outline in the next section. 

### Data Flow

In The Datafied Child, Lupton and Williamson identify a shift to dataveillance in education. They emphasize the way in which students are continuously monitored and analyzed through data, influencing their behavior in ways that are neither transparent nor easily challengeable (2017, p. 4). Marachi and Quill link Canvas to this trend and come to the conclusion that “institutions of higher education are currently ill-equipped to protect students and faculty required to use Canvas Instructure LMS from data harvesting or exploitation” (2020, p. 419). They stress that this is dependent on the way Canvas is configured to allow for an interoperability of applications and “frictionless” or “seamless” data transfer between them (p. 424-424). Applications can be preexisting in-institution student information systems or third-party “Learning Tool Integration” (LTI) apps offered through their app library. A huge benefit of their open-source model is that it has fostered a large amount of third-party integrations: everything from note taking apps, to AI interfaces, to turnitin—a plagiarism checker that forces you to give it a “non-exclusive, royalty-free, perpetual, worldwide, irrevocable license” to anything you submit (Morris & Stommel, 2017). 

One of the hallmarks of a platform technology is the way that it takes a hands off approach to managing interactions on their platform while still holding concentrated power (Vallas & Schor, 2020). They way they let data flow between students, teachers, administrators, and third party integrations uninterrupted externalizes the responsibility of dealing with sensitive student data. At the same time, Instructure controls the means of these interactions and keeps all the data on their AWS servers, using it to improve their products, personalize user experiences, and most importantly fuel a robust analytics ecosystem. The seamlessness of data flow is especially problematic because the use of data often transcends the original context and reason for its collection (Cieslik & Margócsy, 2022, p. 532). Even if initially generated for educational purposes, the data is at the disposal of a private entity with much different incentives than an educational institution, a tension pointed out by Marachi and Quill (2020, p. 430). That their business depends so much on data capital gives them an imperative to offer products with the purpose of capturing more data as well as maintaining infrastructure for its management (Sadowski, 2019, p. 4). This imperative can be seen in their recent acquisition of Parchment, a credential management service best known for their use to issue transcripts and diplomas. Speaking about the acquisition, the CEO of parchment remarked that it will, “dramatically expand the credential to include rich data and more evidence of skills and learning” (Instructure, 2023). To manage their data, Instructure adopted AWS’s analytics tools which their IT director says allow them to be “creative in a very frictionless way” (Instructure Delivers Online Learning Globally Using AWS, 2015).

### Consequences

Many of these concerns are summed up in Common Sense Media’s (2022) privacy report for Canvas, where it received a warning for selling personal information to third parties, using data for personalized advertising, and because data can be collected by third parties (plugins) for their own purposes. This quantification and ostensible ‘personalization’ of education ultimately ends up undermining complex learning interactions (Marachi & Quill, 2020, p. 429). It also extends beyond the classroom, as their data representation can be used to make judgements about them later in life and impact their opportunities (Lupton & Williamson, 2017, p. 8-9). Parchment is a particular concern in this regard. Couldry & Mejias describe how this data is used to govern by proxy, which happens far away from the initial place of data generation in a way that is not accountable to the social actor it describes (2019, p. 118, 146). Some parents have realized this dynamic and filed a class action lawsuit against Instructure which claims their massive data collection scheme transcends any legitimate educational purposes and prioritized motives “unaligned with, and are even adversarial to, children’s privacy and healthy development” (Mehorter, 2025).

## Pedagogy

Although the LMS is not a pedagogical approach, it does have important implications for pedagogy. When a new technology is developed and the social relationships it is seeking to facilitate are not critically analysed, it risks encoding prevailing norms in its design. This is because technologies are not neutral objects—the way they are designed shape how people interact with one another and enforce a certain politics (Winner, 2020, p. 22). Going back to one of the platform features mentioned earlier, “having a designed core architecture that governs the interaction possibilities" (Srnicek, 2019, p. 48), it is important to examine the way this applies to Canvas because in this case, those interaction possibilities are in fact Canvas’ pedagogy. The definitive research done on this comes from Swerzenski’s wonderful piece Critically analyzing the online classroom: Blackboard, Moodle, Canvas, and the pedagogy they produce (2021).

He argues that LMSs embody a "transmission" model of teaching, which has been a longstanding hegemonic and problematic logic in education (p. 52). This model creates a banking-like system where teachers are seen as the sole dispensers of value, and the students as empty receptacles in need of filling (p. 53). This can actually take power away from teachers in addition to students, because when teachers upload their content to the LMS in the case of distance learning, they become more akin to facilitators, monitoring student engagement and outcomes while the system does all the teaching (p. 57). It also fails to recognize that teachers and students are both co-producers of knowledge, instead enforcing a top-down authority of empiricist logic (p. 59, 61). Lastly, it undercuts critical dialogue by allowing it to be graded (p. 61) and constrains the practice of problem-posing by providing only teachers the tools to engage with multimedia content (p. 63-64).

### Past Canvas

Since technologies embody a certain kind of politics and way of being, it is important to critically analyse the online classroom. When we don’t take a step back and look at the pedagogy that our LMSs endorse it creates a situation where students are reduced to their data representation in the eyes of educators (Swerzenski, p. 54), as well as in their own view of themself (Lupton & Williamson, 2017, p. 9). However, it is important to note that these downfalls are the most prominent in distance learning, or what some have called “pandemic pedagogy," where there is no other option than to go online. When LMSs are used in conjunction with in-person learning, it is often the case that the most used features become simply downloading and submitting assignments, subverting most of the negative pedagogical aspects. When permissible, LMSs need be only one aspect of an educator’s course, a small component in tandem with other equitable means to facilitate learning. This is why it’s such a shame that some educators have no option to opt out of Canvas due to their institutional rules. Canvas’ default pedagogy is a force that constrains teachers' imaginations and takes the option for alternative, more just pedagogy off the table.

# Conclusion

Although there are some pessimistic accounts that we keep using LMSs because they are a consumerized way of getting the job done just good enough to not warrant an investigation into a better option (Feldstein, 2014; Kroner, 2017), I hold firm in my belief that critical inquiry is necessary. In this paper I’ve covered the way in which Canvas behaves like a platform: operating a privately owned intermediation space that embodies a certain politics, extracting rent and data from these interactions, and externalizing the responsibility over them; I’ve outlined the role of the cloud in enabling these interactions; and I’ve outlined the consequences of this learning platform, from problematic pedagogy to the risks of student datafication. This research serves to look into the foundations of Canvas, with hopes that it can provide a starting point for imagining more equitable ways to organize and manage (if that is even the right word) online learning.

# Further Research

What I primarily do in this paper is draw connections from Canvas right now to platform technologies. In doing so I have avoided some contextual aspects that could be worth investigating. There is rich literature that situates platforms within a permissive neoliberal regulatory environment, and work could be done to similarly situate LMSs within the neoliberalizing university. Furthermore, more research could be done to examine the role of finance in the LMS market, as Blackboard and Canvas both are heavily financialized companies.

# References

Canvas Analytics: A guide to choosing and using the right tools. (n.d.). Instructure. [https://www.instructure.com/en-au/resources/ebooks/canvas-analytics-guide-choosing-and-using-right-tools](https://www.instructure.com/en-au/resources/ebooks/canvas-analytics-guide-choosing-and-using-right-tools)

Canvas Free For Teacher Comparison. (n.d.). Instructure. [https://www.instructure.com/canvas/free-for-teacher/account-comparison](https://www.instructure.com/canvas/free-for-teacher/account-comparison)

Change is Good. (2011, January 31). [Video recording]. Instructure. [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dCIP3x5mFmw](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dCIP3x5mFmw)

Cieslik, K., & Margócsy, D. (2022). Datafication, Power and Control in Development: A Historical Perspective on the Perils and Longevity of Data. Progress in Development Studies, 22(4), 352–373. [https://doi.org/10.1177/14649934221076580](https://doi.org/10.1177/14649934221076580)

Citron, D. K. (2024). The Surveilled Student. Stanford Law Review, 76, 1439–1472.

Coates, J. (2020, December 31). Our Open Source Strategy. [https://www.instructure.com/resources/blog/our-open-source-strategy](https://www.instructure.com/resources/blog/our-open-source-strategy)

Contributing. (2021, June 2). Canvas LMS on Github. [https://github.com/instructure/canvas-lms/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md](https://github.com/instructure/canvas-lms/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md)

Couldry, N., & Mejias, U. A. (2019). The Costs of Connection: How Data Is Colonizing Human Life and Appropriating It for Capitalism. Stanford University Press.

Data-driven Campus LMS Strategy. (2013, September 15). Edutechnica. [https://edutechnica.com/2013/10/15/data-driven-campus-lms-strategy/](https://edutechnica.com/2013/10/15/data-driven-campus-lms-strategy/)

Ensmenger, N. (2021). The Cloud Is a Factory. In Your Computer Is on Fire. The MIT Press. [https://doi.org/10.7551/mitpress/10993.003.0005](https://doi.org/10.7551/mitpress/10993.003.0005)

Falcone, K. (2018). A Case Study of Faculty Experience and Preference of Using Blackboard and Canvas LMS [EDD/ET, University of Phoenix]. In ProQuest Dissertations and Theses (2027315741). ProQuest Dissertations & Theses Global. [https://www.proquest.com/dissertations-theses/case-study-faculty-experience-preference-using/docview/2027315741/se-2?accountid=14496](https://www.proquest.com/dissertations-theses/case-study-faculty-experience-preference-using/docview/2027315741/se-2?accountid=14496)

Feldstein, M. (2014, November 10). Dammit, the LMS. eLiterate. [https://eliterate.us/dammit-lms/](https://eliterate.us/dammit-lms/)

Feldstein, M. (2015, 14). Instructure is Truly Anamalous. eLiterate. [https://eliterate.us/instructure-is-truly-anamalous/](https://eliterate.us/instructure-is-truly-anamalous/)

Feldstein, M. (2018, July 8). Canvas Surpasses Blackboard Learn in US Market Share. eLiterate. [https://eliterate.us/canvas-surpasses-blackboard-learn-in-us-market-share/](https://eliterate.us/canvas-surpasses-blackboard-learn-in-us-market-share/)

Instructure. (2023, October 30). Instructure Signs Definitive Agreement to Acquire Parchment, the World’s Largest Academic Credential Management Platform and Network [Press Release]. [https://www.instructure.com/press-release/instructure-signs-definitive-agreement-acquire-parchment-worlds-largest-academic](https://www.instructure.com/press-release/instructure-signs-definitive-agreement-acquire-parchment-worlds-largest-academic)

Instructure Delivers Online Learning Globally Using AWS. (2015, August 4). [Video recording]. Instructure. [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oUHAZIJ1nFQ](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oUHAZIJ1nFQ)

Kroner, G. (2016, March 16). Why I Love the Open Learning XML Format and XBlocks. [https://edutechnica.com/2016/03/16/why-i-love-open-edxs-open-learning-xml-format-and-xblocks-component-architecture/](https://edutechnica.com/2016/03/16/why-i-love-open-edxs-open-learning-xml-format-and-xblocks-component-architecture/)

Kroner, G. (2017, January 29). Why Are We Still Using LMSs? [https://edutechnica.com/2017/01/29/why-are-we-still-using-lmss/](https://edutechnica.com/2017/01/29/why-are-we-still-using-lmss/)

LMS Data—Spring 2025 Updates. (2025, May 26). Edutechnica. [https://edutechnica.com/2025/05/26/lms-data-spring-2025-updates/](https://edutechnica.com/2025/05/26/lms-data-spring-2025-updates/)

Locke, C. (2015, February 24). Instructure Plots Path to IPO, Corporate Customers After $40M Series E. EdSurge. [https://www.edsurge.com/news/2015-02-24-headed-for-ipo-and-corporate-users-instructure-s-next-move](https://www.edsurge.com/news/2015-02-24-headed-for-ipo-and-corporate-users-instructure-s-next-move)

Lupton, D., & Williamson, B. (2017). The datafied child: The dataveillance of children and implications for their rights. New Media & Society, 19(5), 780–794. [https://doi.org/10.1177/1461444816686328](https://doi.org/10.1177/1461444816686328)

Marachi, R., & Quill, L. (2020). The case of Canvas: Longitudinal datafication through learning management systems. Teaching in Higher Education, 25(4), 418–434. [https://doi.org/10.1080/13562517.2020.1739641](https://doi.org/10.1080/13562517.2020.1739641)

Mehorter, K. (2025, April 7). Class Action Lawsuit Claims Instructure Illegally Monetizes Student Data Collected Through Canvas, Other Education Products. [https://www.classaction.org/news/class-action-lawsuit-claims-instructure-illegally-monetizes-student-data-collected-through-canvas-other-education-products](https://www.classaction.org/news/class-action-lawsuit-claims-instructure-illegally-monetizes-student-data-collected-through-canvas-other-education-products)

Mintz, S. (2020, January 28). Creating Richer, More Robust, Less Confusing Online Learning Experiences. Higher Ed Gamma. [https://www.insidehighered.com/blogs/higher-ed-gamma/creating-richer-more-robust-less-confusing-online-learning-experiences](https://www.insidehighered.com/blogs/higher-ed-gamma/creating-richer-more-robust-less-confusing-online-learning-experiences)

Morris, S. M., & Stommel, J. (2017, May 15). A Guide for Resisting Edtech: The Case against Turnitin. Hybrid Pedagogy. [https://hybridpedagogy.org/resisting-edtech/](https://hybridpedagogy.org/resisting-edtech/)

Norman, D. (2013, February 15). Norman’s Law of eLearning Tool Convergence. [https://darcynorman.net/2013/02/15/normans-law-of-elearning-tool-convergence/](https://darcynorman.net/2013/02/15/normans-law-of-elearning-tool-convergence/)

Peters, N. (2023, April 2). Holding the Strings. State of Power. [https://www.tni.org/en/article/holding-the-strings](https://www.tni.org/en/article/holding-the-strings)

Privacy Evaluation for Canvas. (2022, December 20). Common Sense Media Privacy Program. [https://privacy.commonsense.org/evaluation/canvas](https://privacy.commonsense.org/evaluation/canvas)

Sadowski, J. (2019). When data is capital: Datafication, accumulation, and extraction. Big Data & Society, 6(1), 2053951718820549. [https://doi.org/10.1177/2053951718820549](https://doi.org/10.1177/2053951718820549)

Sadowski, J. (2020). The Internet of Landlords: Digital Platforms and New Mechanisms of Rentier Capitalism. Antipode, 52(2), 562–580. [https://doi.org/10.1111/anti.12595](https://doi.org/10.1111/anti.12595)

Srnicek, N. (2019). Platform capitalism (Reprinted). Polity.

Sulun, C. (2018). The evolution and diffusion of learning management systems: The case of Canvas LMS. Driving Educational Change: Innovations in Action, 86, 92–109.

Swerzenski, J. (2021). Critically analyzing the online classroom: Blackboard, Moodle, Canvas, and the pedagogy they produce. Journal of Communication Pedagogy, 4, 51–69.

Tate, E. (2018, July 16). How Canvas came to unseat Blackboard as the leading LMS. EdScoop. [https://edscoop.com/how-canvas-came-to-unseat-blackboard-as-the-leading-lms/](https://edscoop.com/how-canvas-came-to-unseat-blackboard-as-the-leading-lms/)

Vallas, S., & Schor, J. B. (2020). What Do Platforms Do? Understanding the Gig Economy. Annual Review of Sociology, 46(1), 273–294. [https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-soc-121919-054857](https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-soc-121919-054857)

Winner, L. (2020). Do Artifacts Have Politics? In The whale and the reactor: A search for limits in an age of high technology (Second Edition, pp. 19–39). University of Chicago Press.